>> Hey all. Hey Seth.
>> Hello.
>> Awesome to have you here on the show.
>> Thanks for having me.
>> Yeah, absolutely. I'm looking forward to talking about the details,
the steps of releasing CPython.
For those of you who have not been watching and paying attention,
by the time this comes out,
it'll probably have already happened.
I'm sure it's already happened.
By the time this video is up though,
It's not quite happening.
So as of the recording next Monday, this whole process that we're going to talk
about goes into action, right?
Releasing Python 3.11.
Yeah.
This, not 3.12.
This will have happened.
3.12.
I got to get used to it.
It's like the, you know, in January, all you always write the year wrong.
Yeah.
So 3.12, the new version, the still faster, faster CPython 3.12 with lots of cool
features is going to be out and how does that happen, right?
There's a lot going on behind the scenes.
And you wrote a really cool blog post called Visualizing the CPython Release Process or
something like that.
I'm getting off memory.
And has a great diagram with a whole bunch of boxes.
And so we're going to go through and kind of just talk about how that happens and so
on.
But before we get into it, maybe a quick intro for folks who don't know you yet.
- Yeah.
I'm Seth Larson, online everywhere.
I am Seth M. Larson, that's my handle.
And I am the security developer in residence
at the Python Software Foundation,
the inaugural security developer in residence.
Hopeful for more, obviously.
But yeah, this whole role is funded
through the OpenSSF Alpha Omega project specifically.
And it's kind of a project that's focusing
on Alpha being really, really important projects
that like everyone agrees, yep, that's a really important project to secure. So among them
is Python and PyPI. And then Omega is kind of like the long tail, right? Like all the
other projects, because there's open source is huge. There's millions of different projects.
How can we secure those? And so yeah, the this role exists because of them. So I'm very
thankful. And it's as are we all right? Yeah, as a community. This is yeah, there's been
a lot of places where it's like, well, why doesn't someone take care of is like, well,
nobody's whose sole job it is. But like, Python has been slowly rolling in these new roles,
which is fantastic. Like, Lukas Lange at the developer in residence, you're the security
developer in residence. We have Mike Fiedler, who I spoke to about on PyPI security. Like,
there's people, there's developers working on stuff. It's awesome.
There's something to be said, like having someone working on stuff full time, like you
you can get a lot done.
It's quite nice, like, 'cause we're so used to,
you know, how the speed of open source, right?
Which is not, I guess when someone says
the speed of open source, they don't immediately think,
oh yeah, that's gonna be fast and snappy
because people have lots.
- Sometimes it is.
Yeah, well sometimes it is. - Sometimes it is.
- When things are brand new,
they can have a lot of momentum.
But, you know, my personal view is like,
on all these software projects,
there's these little gnarly edges
that is just as fun for no one, right?
And like, I want to add this new feature or I want to add async to this thing.
So people can do this and like, you can get so inspired even if it's not your job
and it's just your project and really go on it.
But like, you know, really polishing out that little bit of documentation or, or
updating that detour, like it's, it's all the fine polish, I guess, that I think you
all are bringing to Python, which is awesome.
Yeah.
There's tons of work.
That's like, it really does need that amount of time investment and like
a sustained time investment. So like when you're working with external groups, or like,
you know, developing processes and stuff like that, like you just need, you just need to
be there a lot more than you know, weekends. So it's good to have that full time presence.
Yeah, yeah, I think it is too, although it's absolutely mind blowing how much stuff gets
done in traditional pure open source.
It really is. Honestly, it gives a whole new perspective to it, right? It's like, okay,
You know, all of this is happening, but, you know, almost all of the people that I interact
with on a day to day basis are volunteers.
And so like, I kind of wrote about this a little bit in my opening, when I announced
myself as a security developer in residence, but it's like, you need to, you can't have
expectations and like, assign people work, you know what I mean?
Like, this is not a traditional work environment where you can just tell people what to do.
And you know, it, it, yeah, it's a certain way of working.
And I'm used to it because I am an open source maintainer myself.
So it, it makes a lot of sense to me.
And I feel very comfortable with it.
But it's very different than a regular security developer job would be.
Would you say fewer TPS reports?
Yeah, a few fewer.
Yeah.
Just a couple fewer.
Hey, you, since you brought it up, maybe we'll come back to this if we have time at the end.
you know, you've got some pretty notable projects that you're working on here. Like,
give a quick shout out to some of your open source work that predates this.
Yeah. So I am the lead maintainer of your lib three, which is one of the
most downloaded Python packages on PyPI. I also help maintain requests. It's a user of your lib
three. And then in addition to that, I have a library, which I quite love, which is called
trustor, which is being adopted by a lot of package managers right now, like pip and conda and PDM,
which allows those, those packages to use system certificates as opposed to something like certify,
so that you can take advantage of all of the benefits that you get for using a system trust
store for HTTPS, as opposed to like a static bundle of certificates because operating systems
are actually constantly checking, updating all of these things. It's just a little bit better.
Some certificate store or some certificate authority turns out to be shady and they get
revoked and yeah, or just not have not have the best practices. And so yeah, just like,
okay, we're gonna pull that one. But we're even pulling a search. Yeah, they even get
stolen, right? Sometimes these certificates get stolen, they get stolen, you know, there's all
sorts of things that can go wrong. Thankfully, it doesn't go wrong very often. Otherwise,
there would be a lot bigger of a problem. But yeah, it does happen every once in a while.
Yeah, that's cool. Yeah, and you're on Python Bytes, my other podcast I do with Brian, to talk
about Trustor, which is cool. All right, back to this. So tell us a bit about this developer,
security developer in residence role. Like people are like, oh, this, maybe they've heard of it,
or it's maybe even new to them. But like, what is your, what is your job here in the PSF space?
Yeah, it's, it's, it's kind of funny talking about my role, too, because people see security through
so many different lenses. And this is even like outside of talking to people online that are in
open source space. So whenever I talk about this job, people will say, Oh, so you do it security
for the PSF? And I'm like, Well, no, I don't do that. And then they'll say, Oh, so you're a hacker?
Yeah, right? I'm in, right? No, no. So I don't do that. I don't do it security for the PSF. And
And then the next question they usually ask is like,
oh, so you make it so that Python is more secure,
like the code of Python is more secure.
And I'm like, not really, honestly, I don't do that either.
And what I really do is try my best to make it so that
bad stuff doesn't happen to Python users.
And so, you know, obviously those things are important,
like securing Python, the actual code itself,
but on like the scale factor,
maybe those are a little bit less important
than some things like making sure that
when you download something from python.org,
it is the correct thing.
Making sure that when a release is happening for Python,
nothing can subvert that release and get injected in
and then distributed to everyone.
And then it goes beyond Python
when you start thinking about like the packaging space.
So like making sure that pip release process is good.
making sure that all of these tools and stuff that are using all of these binary libraries,
how can you be sure that those libraries that are bundled along with them don't have vulnerabilities?
And then a lot of things around process, so vulnerability management and making sure that
vulnerabilities that are discovered in Python and reported to us,
they actually get to the end of the process where they're fixed and released.
There's just a whole bunch of things like that, where it's more of like a scale and safety and like making sure that
my effort goes towards things that are gonna keep on churning as opposed to things that are like
spot fixes, right? Because spot fixes, they're important,
but they don't have the scale and they don't have that like keep on giving you the value aspect of them.
Yeah, and the consequence of a lot of what you described sounds like supply chain type issues.
The consequence of that is so bad.
It doesn't matter how patched your computer is or how good your firewall is.
If CPython itself ships with a virus, right.
Right.
Yeah.
Or like somebody snuck it in right at the builds.
Right, right, right.
And so it's good that you're focused on those.
Nobody wants that.
Well, almost nobody wants that.
Very few people want this.
So those are not good people.
We don't want them to want this.
We don't take them into consideration
for their use cases.
- We sure don't.
Awesome.
And let's see, I believe you're on,
well, when I read the article, you're on week nine.
So you're on week 10.
Is that where we are?
- I think I'm on week 12 at this point.
- Oh man, time flies.
- Yeah, I know.
I'm actually drafting up like a quarterly review
and it's a big thing.
So yeah.
- Okay.
See a quick question from the audience here
in the live stream.
you know, Lewis asks, is there a visibility or will there be a public visibility for CVEs
in packages?
That is an excellent question.
It is a good question.
And I bring this up because didn't the PSF just get certified as like a CVE authority
or whatever that is like ability to create CVEs?
I don't know.
I can I can talk so much about this, right.
So there, there's a whole bunch of stuff happening in that space.
So the first I'll start off with stuff that I did not personally do, but I'm helping maintain
now, which is there is an advisory database called,
if you go on GitHub, it's github.com/pypa/advisorydatabase
with a dash in between advisory and database.
And that database is essentially trying
to categorize all of the CVEs and what versions
they affect for every single package on the Python package
index, which is an impossible task,
but so we're trying our best there.
(laughing)
But yeah, so one of the--
- Only half a million packages, no problem.
- No problem, right?
Like that's a manual task right there.
Yeah, no, so what this actually does is for the bulk of it,
what it will do is it'll go out
and it'll pull the CVE feed from MBD and Mitre
and it will parse it and try to find references
to Python packages and versions inside of CVEs.
So obviously that's, sometimes there's false positives,
But a lot of the times it just works out okay.
And there's a little bit of triage involved.
There's a little bit of manual submission of this too.
But yeah, so tools like pip audit,
which is a tool that I love so much,
uses this database in addition to other scanning tools.
Like any scanning tool can use this database.
But yeah, this is the canonical location
for vulnerabilities affecting Python packages.
So for Python itself, the Python Software Foundation
just recently, like a few weeks ago,
announced that we are now a CVE numbering authority,
which means that we are,
we kind of have like a scope of just Python
and pip right now.
So those are the only two projects
that we're emitting CVEs for.
And what that means we can do is it means that people
have to submit reports to us, which is good,
because then they can't submit them to other places
get CVs that way can be kind of frustrating, because in the past, sometimes that would
happen. And then we wouldn't know about the vulnerability until it got published as a
CV. And we'd be like, what?
We have a CV.
Yeah, right.
The big deal is you're supposed to be told, in an ideal world, you're supposed to be given
like a come knock in the back door, like that WebP code, we need to talk about the WebP
code before.
Oh, gosh, don't get me started on WebP. Don't get me started on WebP. So yeah, the real
But like the ideal process is someone would Google like Python and security or like Python
and report a vulnerability.
And then they would find these like really lovely instructions that someone else wrote
up to say, just send an email to security@python.org with whatever information you have.
And then we triage that.
And if we decided it's a vulnerability, we would ask for a CVE on your behalf and like
credit you and all this stuff and then fix it.
And then the release and publication of the CVE would happen at the same time.
So that's what we call coordinated vulnerability disclosure.
And so instead of like, oh, there's a vulnerability, but there's no fix available for that vulnerability,
like that's what you want to avoid, because it causes it causes panic.
And in theory, it could cause exposure, right?
Where there's right, some dwell time in between when people or it doesn't minimize the dwell
time between when people are able to patch and when the vulnerability is known to potential
attackers.
Right.
There's already a latency from when it's announced to somebody actually fixing it.
But if when you hear it, you can't actually fix it for two more weeks because it's not
released.
Well, that just gives people two weeks to try to dissect like what exactly do they mean
by there's this image problem?
Exactly.
Yeah.
Oh, yeah.
I'm working on my image.
Yeah.
We're going to start talking about libwebp actually.
- I guess the most recent example,
'cause last night there was a,
and really relevant to CVEs,
because there was some drama that Apple patched
some of their code.
When Google announced it,
it looked like it was only applied to Chrome,
but it actually applied to anything that used WebP,
which looking at the updates is like,
everything on my computer needs to be updated because of it.
You know, like that mismatch was like,
caused a lot of drama.
- I definitely agree.
Yeah, there was like a week of time
in between when that CVE just mentioned Chrome and Apple,
and then when it actually ended up mentioning LibWebP,
and then right when it mentioned LibWebP,
I'm like, oh, I know a lot of Python packages use that.
And so I then went out and go and talk to those people.
And they fixed those things now.
- Yeah, that's great.
Another good reason to stay on top of
dependency management and stuff, right?
Like tools.
One of the things I think we're coming to sort of understand and manage better
in the Python space is not your dependencies,
but the transitive closure of your dependencies, right?
So I might use, let me just say a guess,
what if I use Pillow to work with images,
but Pillow itself uses some other library that it pip installs
that itself might have some kind of image code.
If I say I use Pillow, oh, I need to update it,
pip install --upgrade pillow
doesn't upgrade its dependencies
and those dependencies of the, right?
So like, but that could be where
a lot of silence issues live.
And so things like Poetry, Flit, pip-tools,
there's a lot of tools coming on
that I think are gaining popularity
that treat not just what you directly wanted
to pip install, but its friends and its dependencies.
- Yeah, definitely.
- What's your thought about that
from a security perspective?
Yes. So having the most important thing from like a kind of dependency management side
of things is having those lock files and having them have hashes. Like it's less of a problem
now. Like I, it likely won't come to fruition that those hashes end up being important,
but luckily lots of lock file formats do generate hashes anyways, which is great. So that subverts
attacks against PyPI partially.
And in the middle, DNS madness.
Right, yeah.
Like if somehow you've been tricked into using a bad certificate or something, right?
Like it, it saves you from a lot of stuff like that.
So having hashes, they're basically free.
They're great.
Just use those.
The other side of it is running a vulnerability checker against those dependencies, because
then you'll or either that or having a tool that's doing that for you.
So like Dependabot is a tool that does that for you.
It will check vulnerability databases
and then give you like a security notification or a PR
to say, hey, this is affected by a medium severity
vulnerability, or you can run them your own via pip audit
with, you can either check an already installed environment
or it can check like a requirements file.
I don't know the full extent of all the different file types
that it can check.
I know that it works on requirements.txt, but yeah,
it'll check those files for known vulnerabilities
and all of the transitive dependencies,
just everything that's available.
And then from there, it'll tell you,
"Hey, these are the things that you need to fix.
Here are the fixed versions.
Try upgrading to at least this."
- It doesn't mean that it's easy. - It goes back to that
advisory database you talked about?
It does go back to that advisory database.
And it also can hook into osv.dev,
which is kind of like this global aggregation
of tons of different vulnerability databases. So for example, we have one for Python that
I pointed out, but then like Rust has one, Debian has one, what is it? Rocky Linux, I think has one,
like there's just a whole bunch of them. And you can kind of interface with this database using the
same API. And it's kind of nice. So yeah. - So making this the security show, we just talked
I talked to Mike Fiedler a little while ago about that as well, diving into it.
We'll come back to the release process, but I do want to ask you about this.
One of the challenges I see is I've got to depend upon a warning.
Luckily it was for basically the requirements-dev side, not the true requirements.
I'm going to use a bunch more tools to do Jupyter stuff on my data, but I'm really just
running a website and there's a much smaller set of things on there.
But there was a vulnerability report for something, some package that was in my requirements for
the dev verge, the dev setup.
However, when I tried to go update it, one other package that was the reason that was
there, said, "No, it has to be less than something."
And that something was less than the fix.
And I'm like, "How do I square these two things?"
I can pip install it, but then it keeps complaining that you're running the wrong version.
No, I'm not.
The other one has a remote CVE in it, a remote code execution in it.
I'm like, I really don't want that.
Not a server, so it's probably fine, but I really don't want that.
I don't care if it's slightly more unstable.
I want the new one.
Give it to me.
That's a bit of a challenge, I think.
When you say, I've got 50 dependencies, and I've got to somehow square, I need to get
a brand new one right away.
What are your thoughts on that?
Yeah, this is a super tough problem.
And I think it's one that open source will be coming to reckon with even more now, right?
Because we're kind of in a place now where there's a few really important libraries,
which are kind of moving something that is very extensively and widely used
to be not maintained anymore.
For example, OpenSSL.
OpenSSL 1 or 1.1.1, which is extremely widely used,
is no longer maintained.
There's going to be no more security patches for that.
And it's going to be tough because my guess is
that there's also just a lot of software that's not built
for OpenSSL 3 being the OpenSSL of choice, right?
Luckily Python is not in that situation,
but it's certainly like a thing that other pieces
of software might have to deal with.
In terms of Python packaging,
This is kind of why the guidance on don't specify an upper bound unless you know that
that upper bound like makes sense.
And like so like backwards incompatibility, like yeah, maybe you want to say, okay, if
this is version 2.1 dot whatever, and it's SemVer, you can say, okay, anything less than
three is probably fine.
But even that, right, if that package goes unmaintained.
>> Yeah, this went from two to three in its main version, right?
It's major version.
- Right, yeah, so this is a difficulty.
- Yeah, there's a lot of packages
that set hard upper bounds,
and I just, I don't know why,
because maybe it's gonna break it,
but I feel like it's speculative.
Like, ah, we should probably not let a major version run.
But that leads into trouble, right?
Like, even if you just wanna use some other library
that says greater than or equal to three,
and this one says less than three,
you're like, great, now what do I do?
- Yeah, I think the toughest thing
that you can't go back and then like amend it. Yeah. That's the hardest part is because so I
will speak very very highly of all of these anything that can make pip automatically get
the right thing is just magical is so good and so people like that and I totally get why people are
doing these upper bound sorts of things but yeah it does have the issues that you that you talked
about but yeah there's something to say about how great the uh those bound checks are i wish there
was a way that you could add something like some sort of guidance to pip to say after the fact like
okay i said this was open but now i'm gonna go ahead and tell you that like this definitely
doesn't work with this version maybe that's something that can get recommended but yeah
it's just so nice when it does work out
I can relate to Frank here who writes,
"With 1.3 thousand, 1,300 dependencies in our project,"
because of this, dependencies are hell at all times.
I have on Talk Python Training, the course's website,
I think there's 248 packages if you look at what's installed
and then the dependencies.
Then you try to throw in the data science-y stuff
and it's just like, there's a 50/50 chance
that I can actually install everything.
It's like half the time something has got a less than,
something's got a greater than, and I'm like, oh my gosh.
As you upgrade, right?
Like at any point in time, it's deterministic.
But over the evolution of it, right?
- Yeah, no, it's tough.
It's tough when you start getting to that number.
Like there's just so many intertangled things.
- There are, and like the reason I bring this up now
is it's a hassle when like I wanna use this library
and that library, and somehow I've gotta like juggle things
so they work, but it's concerning
when you get a Dependabot alert that says there's a remote code execution,
you're going to need to deal with it, and your dependencies won't let you upgrade.
You know what I mean?
That's why I bring this up.
It's definitely concerning.
Yeah, another thing that you can do, and this is...
I feel like they don't talk about this as much with Dependabot,
is that there are ways to mitigate vulnerabilities
that doesn't necessarily have to come from upgrading.
Like, I'm always going to say upgrading your dependency is the best way to go forward,
because then you know that there's no chance of at least that vulnerability in particular being exploited.
But if it's something like remote code execution, but it's this one component, right?
As long as you're not using that component, then you're fine.
Or if it's remote code execution, when you get some sort of input, whatever, right?
That's that's malformed or whatever, and you're like, okay, well, that component is not exposed to the network.
It's I only use it internally.
So there is something to say.
In the real extreme case, it's not even a server.
It doesn't open a port, right?
It's just a thing I run on my computer.
It probably doesn't matter.
Exactly.
I'm the one typing into it, but if it's in your website,
then all of a sudden it gets a little trickier, right?
Then it gets dicier.
Definitely.
The stakes are higher when you attach the internet to anything.
But when it's a local script, it's probably more your thing.
Just look at your log file.
Just tail your log file.
Hack, hack, request, attempted hack, request.
- WP login. - It's just nonstop.
Yes, WP admin, all them things, yeah.
Luckily it's WP something or something most of the time.
- Yeah, you're safe against 90%, we're all good.
As long as you don't return a 200 to any of those,
like your traffic will remain low.
- Yeah, absolutely.
All right, so that's what you're doing,
focusing on these kinds of things.
That's really, really awesome.
And thanks for giving us an even more detailed look
than I expected into it.
(laughing)
Yeah.
Let's talk about your,
let's talk about the timely thing.
I mean, security's always timely,
but the CPython, let me see if I get this right,
3.12 release coming up here on Monday.
- Dang, he's got it.
- Amazing.
I got it, man.
I'm ready.
I'm ready for this new world.
So there's a pep, and let's see who put this together.
This is Barry Warsaw and Guido.
And it is PEP 101.
I love it.
PEP 101.
>> 101 you need, right?
>> Yeah, what a perfect number.
But the title is Doing Python Releases 101.
That's kind of circular.
I love it.
And it just talks about all the steps.
And it's kind of a manual of now you do this, now you do that.
But it's just a really long doc.
I love the stop, stop, stop, stop, stop.
There's like, there's like a all caps all across.
Stop, stop, stop, stop, stop.
Did you do this right?
Right?
- Yep.
That you can tell, you can always tell
when there were problems in the past in a checklist, right?
Like if there ever was something that happened incorrectly,
it's very obvious.
And so, yeah, the stop, stop, stop.
I feel that that, I don't personally know why that's there,
but I do laugh every time I see it, so.
Yeah, let's see.
Please note how PEP 101 replaces PEP 102.
Time traveling was invented there.
What is the--
- Yeah, at the very top, I wanted to comment on that too.
It said replaces PEP 102.
And I wonder if it was more like a,
oh, we should just use 101 sort of situation.
- Well, I think this is doing micro releases.
- Right.
- Is this one maybe more like full, like the full deal?
I don't know.
I think security releases are, they're slightly different.
We don't actually build binary installers
for security releases.
We only build source builds,
like source tarballs for micro releases.
And so maybe that was the distinction in 102.
- Sure.
Okay.
So this has existed since 2001,
but you gotta really dig into it.
And you know, there's some interesting stuff there,
but picture, a thousand words, all these things,
you put together a really nice graphic here.
And somehow you got this in like HTML, I'm impressed.
- Yeah, that's embedded SVG.
I always use draw.io for my diagrams.
I take pride in my diagrams.
- Yeah, looks good.
All right, so there are 10 steps.
Some of the steps have ABCs in them.
And just for people who pull up this picture
And obviously being a podcast, it's hard to see the picture
if you're not watching the live stream.
I will put a link to the article
which has the picture in there.
And if I remember right,
I'll even put it as the chapter art.
We'll see about that.
But there's a legend in here.
So you've got like different types of things.
You've got human actors,
which are golden release artifact,
which is blue, a source of risk,
which is where you're paying extra attention.
and the start and end state.
And so the colors mean stuff here
and the legend at the bottom.
But yeah, let's start with number one.
What happens here?
- Yeah, so starting with number one
and I'm actually gonna increase the size of my screen
as well because I'm gonna pull it up separately myself.
- Yeah.
- Feel free to cut this out.
- There's a lot going on here.
There's a lot going on here.
You need some Command or Control + on it.
- Yep.
Okay, all right.
So in the very beginning, what happens is essentially the release manager decides it's
time to make a release.
And Thomas Werther's right now.
Yeah, like we're live recording this right now.
And so we're deciding, okay, we're gonna make a release.
And so something that happens even before this is, we kind of talk amongst all of the
other, it says release managers in there, like Windows release manager, macOS release
manager, they kind of flip between that language and experts.
So like Windows expert, macOS expert.
- Someone who understands this weird Windows things
that can make a MSI installer.
- Exactly.
- What do you do on Mac?
I don't even know how to build that.
Right, that person.
Yeah.
- Yeah.
Talk to them.
Get their buy-in that indeed they're gonna be around
when you decide to do this,
because this is kind of like a big coordinated thing.
Everyone has to be around to do their part.
And then if that is the case,
then the release branch gets frozen.
So in this case, that release branch would be 312.
And so that's done by essentially putting a block on all future pushes to the branch,
like in GitHub, you use branch protection.
And that's basically to make it so that no one can merge pull requests anymore,
so that you have something that's stable that you can kind of work off of.
And then after that, you'd move on to step two,
which is the actual release manager will update their fork of the repo
with whatever is on that branch.
So like the 312 branch will get updated
and then you'll pull that branch locally now on step three.
So now you're on the actual release managers machine.
And so like, I kind of have like gray boxes
drawn kind of throughout.
So those are kind of like security boundaries a little bit.
The top most one is the GitHub like organization of Python.
And then the middle, the tiny one that has the fork repo
That's the GitHub user for the release manager in particular.
And then the furthest left, the gigantic one,
is the release manager's actual computer.
It's not documented anywhere.
It's just how I was thinking about it.
But yeah, so then there's this thing called release tool.
And so release tool is basically just a Python script.
It's on GitHub.
If you go to github.com/python/release-tool,
it's basically just a script that runs
and then does all of the stuff that's needed to build
the source distribution and documentation
of a new Python release.
And so you run that, and as a result,
you kind of get like a huge amount of code
that needs to be committed.
And so there's a whole bunch of different little tools
that kind of get run in addition to that.
So things like Blurb, Sphinx gets run as a part of that.
Yeah, you need a whole lot of dependencies installed.
So you like you need like late tech, you need a whole bunch of stuff installed for this
to actually work.
Do you make sure you've got like the right right compiler?
Is there a lot of concern about that?
Like is it clang or LLVM or GCC or, you know, I believe it's GCC.
I believe it's GCC.
You know, I didn't dig into that exact point.
No, it's fine.
It's fine.
But I feel like that's another part that you like, that choice matters, right?
Like you might get different outputs, you might discover bugs that weren't there.
So you got to kind of get that gray box all set up as well.
Right?
Yeah, definitely.
And so the fact that it's on someone's machine, I would say reproducibility is quite tough
in those sorts of situations.
Right?
Like if, if, if someone were to build a release of Python, and then a day goes by, like, I
guarantee you that the if you tried to do it again, with the exact same starting input,
it would be potentially different, right?
And so that's actually a problem
from a security perspective, reproducibility,
because it means that someone else can't verify
that what you did is correct, right?
- Right, like the hash might change
or something like that, right?
- Hashes might change, or if there's like somehow
the time is getting embedded into a binary somewhere,
like there's just a whole bunch of different ways
that reproducibility could be different
between two different runs.
Yeah, and so then after the release tool happens,
you basically get handed a couple of source tarballs
that just have everything in them.
And then you also get a bunch of,
get like changes to the repository.
So these are things like the change log has been generated
from all of the blurb notes.
And so what you do is then you take all of those changes
and you create a big commit that says,
this is the release of CPython 3.12.0.
And then you tag it and you push that to the fork.
You don't push that to the main repository yet.
And so the reason you don't push that to the main repository,
and this is actually something that this phenomena is an interesting one,
especially because a lot of security build tooling doesn't
take this workflow into account,
which is you don't push the tag to the origin until the very end.
A lot of security tooling like Salsa and all of these things will kind of...
they won't assume because you can do it without tags,
but they'll have features that are, "Oh, we'll capture the git tag
in the output of this document that says that your build came from this repository,
this setup tooling, whatever."
But a lot of projects actually wait on the tag
until the very end because they want things
to be repeatable without causing confusion.
So if something went wrong
throughout this whole release process,
you wouldn't want there to be a tag on the main repo
that is now confusing people, right?
Because those tags cause confusion.
- Oh look, it's already here, I'm gonna get the code.
You're like, actually, no, the Mac build wouldn't build,
we're gonna fix that or whatever, right?
- Right, exactly.
And so this whole thing is like very,
It's a common thing.
So pip actually has this exact same workflow
where they do everything in the release until the very end
and then they push the tag to the repo
because they know that if they push that tag
and it needs to change, it's gonna cause confusion.
So yeah, that kind of is like step five in there.
It pushes that tag.
And so that tag is highlighted red as a source of risk
because that is a fork of CPython
And tags, tags are not in themselves verifiable
because anyone can push a tag.
If you're just looking at just the name of the tag,
anyone can write a tag if you have right access
to a Git repository or a GitHub repository.
And so if you push a tag and say someone has access
to your account, someone could move that tag
to a different commit, completely different commit.
And if it were pulled in that time,
and no one decided to like check something else,
so like the commit hash, for example,
you would be circumvent,
like it would be able to inject code into the process, right?
As far as we know, that has not happened.
Yeah, that is bad.
It is bad to inject arbitrary,
someone else's arbitrary code into Python directly.
And it's also, it's actually doubly bad
because there's different degrees of bad in term,
like in supply chain security.
one degree of bad is like, if you're able to do bad stuff,
but then people notice, right?
Or like people can see what happened.
And so this is kind of like degrees of bad of,
you can inject code and then you can clean up
after yourself afterwards, because you could--
- Put the tag back.
- Put the tag back, do you have write access, right?
And so that sort of like put the tag back
or being able to circumvent it in that way is not good.
Yeah.
give people ideas. These are not new ideas. So I feel bad talking about these. Yeah, another thing
in this article is actually like tying every step of the release process back to a known attack that
has succeeded against another project. So like solar winds was about build, like release artifact
poisoning, essentially, right, you're like taking advantage of the fact that these release artifacts
are being distributed and you know they're signed everything looks good but you've gotten code
injected into the actual artifact itself and it didn't get noticed right and so like that sort of
attack could happen against Python if if there's not mitigations against it right and so yeah and
then the next step is six and so at this point this the release manager has source tarballs
from the result of just running the release tool and so they're kind of just waiting
they're sitting around waiting for the other experts to do their thing now.
And this is where Windows and macOS installers are actually built.
And so these aren't built for security releases, but for 3.12.0, these will be built.
And they're two completely different sets of build processes.
One of them happens in Azure Pipelines.
So if you go to that release tool,
there's actually like a Windows folder that just has 100 YAML files in it for all of the
different Azure pipeline configurations. - Yeah. Azure pipelines a little bit like
GitHub actions. People are familiar with that, but not Azure, right? Something roughly.
- Yeah, yeah. And I think there was like a time where Azure pipelines and GitHub actions
were like basically the same thing. - Yeah, yeah.
- Like in the very beginning. Yeah. So Azure pipelines, there's a whole bunch of stuff that
that happens there because there's Windows embeddable packages is something that gets
uploaded to python.org. Windows installers also get uploaded to python.org. But that
also there's like NuGet gets updated, the Windows Store gets updated there. So like
there's a lot happening there. And there's actually a lot of things that happen that
require the actual release manager, the Windows release manager to like approve them. So like
are gated. These are things like signing keys that are, you know, as a part of the process,
you have to like sign off to say like, yep, we want to give this job access to the signing
key. So that's great.
Do you know if WinGet is kind of like the newer package manager for Windows? Do
you know if Python goes there as well these days?
You know, I haven't used Windows in a really long time. So I don't know.
- I do, but I only use it for playing games
and simple Windows tests, so I don't know it.
All right, but yeah, so NuGet is like
one of these kind of package managers for Windows,
and maybe WinGet.
People in the audience, if anyone knows,
they can let us know.
- Yeah, definitely.
I've not even heard of WinGet,
so I feel really out of the loop right now.
- It's only a couple years old, I believe.
- Gotcha, gotcha.
- And following on with that,
those probably won't help you
if you don't do a lot of Windows.
Louis asks, "Does Python maintain Chocolaty?"
Which is similar to Winget,
but more independent than Winget.
They tried Winget and it was buggy and wasn't great.
Chocolaty is maybe a little older.
I don't know.
Same story probably, right?
- Yeah, I also don't know, unfortunately.
Windows is not my strong suit.
- I mean, it has a tastier name.
- I, yep.
- Yeah, it's all good.
- Definitely a tastier name.
That's how I choose all my tooling,
is how tasty is the name.
- Yeah, and so then the counterpart to that
is the macOS binary installers.
And so those are, there's basically just another set
of scripts that get run on the macOS release manager,
like their machine, and it builds just everything
having to do with macOS.
It does notarization, it does, you know, making,
I know not as much about macOS either,
but I know that notarization happens.
And actually I've talked to a few folks about this one too,
because this one, if you notice is just one square
and it's just red.
And I was like, yeah, there's a lot more to dig into there.
- Yeah, the macOS notarization stuff
is a serious pain as well.
It's a little bit like submitting something
to the iPhone app store where it gets reviewed.
Yeah.
- Yeah.
- I think once you have it already notified,
you can publish updates.
Because I was thinking as you were talking about that, how do you design or deal with
the latency?
I've submitted it and how long until someone picks it up and reviews it?
I don't know.
But I guess once it's approved for notarization, then it just goes through pretty quickly.
- You just set a really long timeout on your CI job.
- Exactly.
- Timeout, seven weeks.
- Yeah, give it a week at least.
- Yeah.
No, and so then after all of those things kind of happen,
there's this stage in, you know, there's a stop, stop, stop line
in the PEP 101 that just basically says for the release manager
to wait for everyone to be done with their thing.
And then once everyone's done with their thing and has uploaded everything to
python.org, there's basically like this phase of
testing everything. So you, you know, download everything, you make
sure everything works and all the operating systems the way that's
expected to. You don't want to like blow the horn and then realize the very
last mile that there's something wrong. And so like lots of testing happens and then after the
testing happens at that point then everything that will get uploaded to python.org or that
has been uploaded to python.org gets signed by the release manager in particular with sigstore and gpg
and then from there all of those signatures get published and that is the end of python.org all of
all of the artifacts are published.
And only then does the release manager, this is step 10,
do a git push to the actual upstream CPython repo.
And at that point, then the branch can be unblocked,
all of these things, the release is done, everyone's happy,
we can celebrate.
Yeah, that's kind of the very high level view
of what happens.
- Amazing.
Couple of thoughts here.
First of all, the Windows Square is tangibly different
than the macOS Square.
The Windows Square says, "Send off some source code
"to Azure Pipelines," a external, repeatable CI build system.
Whereas the Mac line is like, "Build it."
You know what I mean?
That's actually pretty interesting,
and I don't know that there's an Azure Pipeline
for macOS, right?
That's just the sort of the story of Mac and servers.
And but just highlighting those differences, right?
Like it's a different thing to say,
I build on my machine with whatever I got
versus I push to something like Azure Pipeline CI/CD
and get some results back.
- Yeah, both the source tarball builds
and the macOS builds are all local, right?
And they're not done with a repeatable like CI provider.
I was actually able to get like
the actual source tarballs to work on GitHub Actions.
And so that's something that I've worked on
and have provided that to release managers
and we're talking about it right now.
And macOS is actually, to my knowledge,
is actually gonna be revamped a little bit
because that tooling has been around for so long.
I think that there's gonna be some work done on it.
And so I haven't dug into it as deeply.
I've kind of more just provided a bunch of context
to the release managers about things that I wanna see.
Like, if I were to do this myself,
this is the other things I'm interested in.
- Provided that you actually had access to a macOS system,
I'm sure you could do it all from the CLI
because, for example, for the Talk Python courses apps,
we use Flutter and you just say Flutter run
and it compiles that iOS or macOS version
somehow through the command line
and then like out comes a thing
that is already deployed onto a simulator or something.
So it could happen.
I mean, there is some hosting,
but it's kind of like, here's your Mac mini in the cloud.
Go.
- Yeah, I mean, there is a, what is it?
GitHub Action supports macOS, so.
- Does it?
Okay, so yeah, so possibly, yeah.
Maybe it could happen.
I'm not saying it has to.
I'm just, it was a kind of a striking difference
that one is like a CI/CD process
and one is local and manual.
- Yeah, actually Windows is the most repeatable,
most like actually isolated from any,
from the, just the machine itself, right?
The release manager themselves.
So, yeah.
- Yeah, that's pretty interesting.
And then we have binaries and they get published
and everybody is happy.
We all go and install it.
And it's been in testing for quite a while, right?
Like we've had a bunch of betas.
We had alphas, we have had three release candidates
and on Monday we'll have a dot zero.
It's exciting.
It's really exciting.
- It is exciting.
It is exciting.
The other question I would ask you is like, what is the time from like step one to step
10?
How much clock time has passed wall time?
- I would say that it's on the scale of hours.
It's not like a day.
Which is kind of incredible, right?
The fact that you get three volunteers together to do a bunch of all of this stuff.
It only takes a couple hours.
It obviously depends on how many problems you run into on the way, because if you get
to the very end and then there's a problem that you find in testing, you just kind of
start over.
But yeah, if everything goes to plan, which has happened, I've coordinated security.
Like there was a couple of security fixes that were in 3.11.5 that I coordinated.
And yeah, I got to kind of witness the, okay, we've decided we're making a security release
to the actual it's out there. We can now talk about the vulnerabilities. Yeah, that's
on the scale. That's parsing thing. It was the what was it? There was an int part or
was it in parsing? No, it was really long. And I don't know. That's a different one.
No, it was. There was a TLS and this one sounds really scary. It's not as scary. It's a TLS
bypass on the server side. So like if the client is supposed to be authenticated, for example,
if you're using mtls, you can if you like send a handshake and then immediately close your socket,
you can get lucky during like a brief period of time where the socket on the other side,
like the server socket will say like, oh, it's closed. So it's fine, right? And the data that
that whatever you sent over the wire will still be readable,
but then the handshake hasn't actually like completed.
And so that sounds like scary, right?
But it's actually not as bad because so many protocols,
well, for one, so many protocols
don't even use client authentication at all.
So that's one huge point.
The other side of it is that all protocols
that people do end up using like mutual TLS with
are protocols that you have to send something back to--
so like HTTP, for example.
You have to send something back.
And at that point, the socket is closed.
And so it can't send the data back.
So there's no data exfiltration.
It's a pretty narrow scope of what's actually vulnerable.
But yes, the fix for that vulnerability is in 3.11.5.
And there's another one, too, but it's a little bit
or minor?
- Well, we'll start fresh with 3.12
and hopefully you will not have to witness
one of these releases.
Honestly, given how large CPython is
and how wide ranging its standard library attempts to be,
it does not have many vulnerabilities.
I mean, you go look at like a web browser upgrade.
It's like, here's the 27,
like remote code execution vulnerability,
maybe not quite that many,
But here's the 27 security fixes this month, you know?
- Yeah, maybe it's a little more front of mind right now,
now that like Chrome is on their fifth zero day of the week.
But yeah, it's pretty tough week for Chrome right now
and Firefox and the rest of us.
- Yeah, yeah, for sure.
Let's see another comment from Frank says,
"SIGstore and GPG seem a bit at the end of the process,
considering these are built locally in some cases,
how does one guarantee that the science sources
are still right?
- Yeah, so this is kind of getting to the,
like I agree with you, how does one track
that they're still right?
So they get uploaded to python.org.
And at that point, they're kind of like
in a holding pattern for testing.
And so those binaries are there, they're on python.org,
they've got, you know, the hashes have already been taken.
then the testing happens.
So like anything that happens between that and the Sixth-Door Signing,
like yeah, at that point it's kind of protected.
But yeah, there is this really big dwell time where you just have artifacts
sitting on someone's machine, and they're going to get signed and sent out the door.
And that's kind of like the due diligence of release managers.
They need to make sure that those are the right artifacts,
that they've been tested properly, that the ones that you tested locally
the ones that are going to get ended up being signed.
Yeah, and so this is something this is like a piece of the whole puzzle that gets mitigated
by having those builds happen on external services as opposed to on someone's local machine.
Because at that point, you're just giving this like, set of scripts, like, very, very narrow
set of input, like, I want this exact git commit, and this version number to get built.
and then out pops like a tarball that's already been signed and verified and everything. And
then from there, you just put that on python.org, right? Like that, that is a lot less. There's a
lot less of that risk where it's just on someone's machine. And how do how does one know that that is
the exact thing that they built? It's not provable. Yeah.
What about virtual machines for these gray boxes? I mean, obviously, the Azure one,
That's its own thing.
But have you considered a Docker or an official just
Parallels VM and go like, here, take this, run that,
you know what I mean?
To make it a little less dependent on the person whose
role it is that year.
It definitely would help with the reproducibility side
of things, because as we know, Docker is just
the whole machine shipped in a box, right?
So yeah, in theory, if you build the same thing again, in that exact same image, you would end up getting a pretty similar result.
So it helps on that front, which which is good.
I think the tough thing is, is that you don't, you still don't have control of the inputs.
And the output, you also still don't have like this, like, it comes out of the Docker container, you get a tarball.
There's still that time in between when the tarball is out of the container, and when it's actually on python.org,
where it's on someone's machine that is not in a container.
And containers also aren't the best in terms of like, you did mention virtual machines
as well.
But even that, like on a machine that is a high value target, you know, maybe it's worth
it.
Who knows?
Yeah.
All right.
It's pretty interesting and it's happening Monday. So very exciting. And I'm looking
forward to all the new work. I mean, are there new features in 3.12 that are you particularly
excited about? >> You know, since being in this role,
I actually haven't been paying attention to Python releases as much, Python features as much. I'm
mostly excited about it getting faster. I mean, the generic, it's just faster. Like there's no
no one on the planet that's not happy about that.
What are the major features this release?
- Yeah, so there's like some more broad F string things.
So you used to be able to have a subset
of the language in the F string,
and now you can kind of like program in the F string,
I believe.
Type statement, better generic types.
Yeah, there's like a simpler way to express generics
in the type system.
And then I'm with you, you know, honestly,
Like f-strings being nicer, that's awesome.
Thanks for that.
But faster, faster, faster is good.
This per interpreter GIL is kind of part
of that faster CPython thing, right?
Like it's hard to leverage,
but if you could just say in your threads,
new interpreter for this bit, right?
All of a sudden you escape the gill
for computational stuff, that'd be pretty interesting.
But you know, also this is another interesting thing
if you pull up this list.
like the size of the scroll bar.
I don't know.
- We were talking about scary scroll bars earlier.
Like this is--
- I know.
Let me see.
I'll throw this into Omnivore.
Are you a fan of Omnivore, this app?
- Omnivore, never heard of it.
What is it?
- Omnivore.app.
It's kind of a Instapaper pocket replacement.
Oh, I'm already logged into it.
Look at that.
Super, super cool.
So I go here and you say, add a link.
Actually, I think it just went in there.
Let's see.
- 48 minutes just to read that what's new.
That's what I was trying to pull up.
(laughing)
- It just, yeah, it calculates that for you.
It's like, it's gonna take a while.
- So just a sense of like, what is new in Python 3.12?
That's a ton, right?
- Yeah, a ton of stuff, like tons of fixes.
Tons of fixes and improvements.
- Mike, if you're out in the audience says,
Python-M SQLite 3 is nifty.
Mike, you're gonna have to tell me more about this.
- Does that open up a database now?
That would be lovely.
- Yeah, that would be cool.
Kind of like the HTTP server.
- Yes.
- Yeah.
- Or the JSON tool.
The JSON tool is the one I use the most.
- What's that one do?
- So you can like pipe JSON into it
and it'll just make it pretty.
It's pretty, it's questionable how useful it is,
but it sure does make pretty JSON.
- Yeah, nice. - Which I really appreciate.
like two space indented JSON, that's perfect.
- Indeed, all right.
One more comment from the audience
and then we'll maybe wrap it up.
Karen, hey Karen, says, let me,
she's clarifying above,
like VM Docker for less changes and better reproducibility.
VM Docker for less heterogeneity, reproducibility
than the current situation,
which is affected by a given user's environment.
Yeah, like, what web browser did you install today?
Or something completely unrelated or--
- Or like you upgrade, if it's your personal machine
and you're using tools, like if you upgrade those tools,
it could pull some other system dependency, right?
That ends up being relevant to the build of CPython.
And yeah, it's just, there's just so much
that could be different over the course of even a few days.
- Yeah, yeah.
Which is why it's interesting that the Windows one
goes to Azure Pipelines,
'cause it kind of puts that to the side, right?
- Yeah.
- All right, Seth.
Well, this has been super, super interesting.
And thanks for giving us a look into this world.
So yeah, very excellent.
And I guess, you know, final two questions.
You can write some Python code.
What editor are you using these days?
- Oh, yeah, I'm using PyCharm.
I love PyCharm, specifically, you know, the, I have the,
what is it?
I had the professional edition for a good long while,
and then I let that subscription lapse
and I need to just redo it.
But, so I'm using the community edition right now,
but yeah, I love PyCharm so much.
So, really good editor.
- Yeah, awesome.
I'm there with you.
And then notable PyPI package,
something that's interesting to you.
- I already talked about these.
So pip audit, just use pip audit.
There's so much work happening in here somewhere on it
that it just makes sense for you to use it
because there's just a ton of work happening.
And if you just add it to your workflow,
you'll just know that things are vulnerable
or like what's vulnerable
and like what versions you should update to.
- Yeah, I already have some tooling that like some aliases
that do three or four steps
to actually update my dependencies and install them.
Like I might as well just throw this
as like another and, and pip on it.
- Yeah, and you can actually,
I think there's a way that you can tell pip audit
to install packages, but then it will like say something
if there is a vulnerability
in whatever you're installing, right?
So like you can even replace like pip install.
- Instead of using pip, use pip audit.
- I think that that is a feature.
- Yeah? - I think so.
- It has a features thing, let me look at it.
- Oh, let's see it.
Oh, it's not gonna work, it's not the read me.
(laughing)
It's true, I got to go to the home page.
>> No, got to go to the source.
>> No, where's the GitHub? Let me go to the stars.
All right, you know what? Maybe I don't want to click this thing.
Features, there we go.
Multiple emitting.
We haven't talked about SBOMs,
but seamlessly reuse your listing.
Yeah, if it reuses the pip caches,
Maybe, maybe, maybe.
All right.
- What is it?
- I'll play with it and we'll see.
People can check it out.
- Citation needed, citation needed.
- Exactly, citation needed, that's right.
All right, well, yeah, people check out pip Audit.
That looks excellent.
And yeah, final call to action.
People are interested in this.
I mean, give a thought to it on Monday,
theoretically, at least in the past,
if you listen too far in the future,
but you know, the next release.
Yeah, no, I think the biggest so in terms of like, what can you personally do, because
like, there's just I just talked about so much stuff that is just kind of happening
in the background.
But there's also stuff that like individual people can do.
And the most impactful URL that you can visit for security, if you're an open source consumer
or like a maintainer, like it doesn't matter, this is just gonna be impactful if you work
in software is best.open ssf.org.
So that is basically just like a web page and it just has a few URLs and you click into
any of those URLs and it just gives you like a checklist of here's things to think about
here's and then if you click into those checklist items it gives you it's kind of like this
recursive nice like guiding force of like here's the things you could be doing right
and right.
>>Dylan One is a concise guide for developing more secure software in other words NPM best
practices and so on. Yeah, excellent.
Yeah, I'm hoping to put a like Python best practices guide there.
But yeah, you absolutely should.
By the end of the year that I'm here. So don't you worry. Look forward to that.
Excellent. I'll be right there. We'll get it above on the on the list.
Yeah, it'll it'll somehow not sort alphabetically and it'll be okay.
Tip the scales a little bit. Exactly.
Cool. Well, thank you for being here, Seth.
Thank you. And thank you for all this hard work that you're doing.
It's good to know that you're out there
keeping an eye on all these things.
Thank you so much for having me on the show.
This has been lovely.
Yeah, you bet. Catch you next time.
Bye.
[BLANK_AUDIO]